src/about-rbac-6131.md, before:

<!-- "About RBAC" -->

# Work in progress
This work is not yet published, and thus cannot be relied upon by MAAS users.

<a href="#heading--multi-tenancy-in-maas"><h2 id="heading--multi-tenancy-in-maas">Multi-tenancy in MAAS</h2></a>

As a MAAS RBAC administrator, you need to understand multi-tenancy, because it will help you design and maintain useful and functional MAAS RBAC instances.  This means that you need an understanding of groups, roles, and resource pools – and how they connect via RBAC.

<a href="#heading--what-is-multi-tenancy"><h3 id="heading--what-is-multi-tenancy">What is multi-tenancy?</h3></a>

Multi-tenancy means that groups of users own a group of resources (machines) without knowing about other groups of users -- or their machines.  A common multi-tenancy use case provides different sets of machines for different users or groups of users. MAAS can achieve this, to some degree, by allowing users to allocate machines, but this approach has some drawbacks:

- Other administrative users can still see the allocated machines, as well as release and reallocate someone else's machines for themselves.
- Other administrative users can take administrative actions on someone else's machines (e.g., deployment).

To allow better machine access control, MAAS version 2.4 created resource pools.  By themselves, resource pools don't prevent one administrative user from manipulating someone else's machines.  Resource pools are integrated into the Canonical RBAC tool, making separation of privilege possible.

<a href="#heading--how-resource-pools-link-to-rbac"><h3 id="heading--how-resource-pools-link-to-rbac">How resource pools are integrated into RBAC</h3></a>

Resource pools are just a way of grouping machines.  Any given machine can be in exactly one resource pool.  This means that if you can control access to (and visibility of) resource pools, you can effectively control user access.

Note that just using resource pools to hide machines is a flawed access control approach, known as "security by obscurity."  What users don't know will hurt you when the users figure it out, and more often than not, they figure these things out entirely by accident.  There must also be some means of active authorisation that allows access to a resource pool, based on user identity, and there must be some way of controlling what the user can do with that resource pool.  In the parlance of standard security model, "what the user can do" would be called "privileges", but for the purposes of MAAS, we simply call them "permissions."  

<a href="#heading--the-rbac-permissions-model"><h3 id="heading--the-rbac-permissions-model">The RBAC permissions model</h3></a>

RBAC (Role-based access control) does not authenticate users or verify their identity; that depends on upstream tools.  RBAC does associate a given role with a properly-authenticated user identity.  With RBAC, permissions are associated with roles, not individual users, so the role assigned to a user when they authenticate controls what they can and cannot do.

This may seem like an unnecessary distinction, but it some key advantages:

- should a user wish to downgrade their privileges, e.g., so they won't accidentally do something destructive, this is possible without change the user's identity information.
- should a user's role change, requiring a change in privilege, the user account does not have to be modified to make this change.

From the point of view of MAAS, here is a thumbnail sketch of the permissions model:

- MAAS maintains resource pools, which are a machine attribute.  Every machine can be in one and only one resource pool.  Control access to a resource pool, and you control access to a machine.
- RBAC maintains roles, which are associated with user identities and permissions.  For a given user identity to carry out a particular operation in MAAS, that user identity must correspond to a role that has permission to carry out that operation.
- Some other tool (in this case, Candid) verifies the user identity.  If roles are to be effective, the user identity must be correct, and that identity must be verified before reaching RBAC.

The relationship between permissions and MAAS operations is hard coded into MAAS.  If RBAC is used, the code controlling each operation will verify with RBAC that the requesting user has a role that is permitted to perform that operation.

Over 400 permissions exist within MAAS that control whether or not the user can view, add, change, or delete anything from machines to partitions to script sets.  RBAC collects these permissions into four roles:

- Administrator: all permissions for all resource pools.
- Operator: all permissions for a specific resource pool, but not others.
- User: limited permissions, corresponding to the normal rights of a MAAS users.
- Auditor: permission to view data, only (i.e., read-only access).

MAAS code and RBAC code must work together to ensure that only users with the correct permissions are able to perform a specific operation; i.e., the MAAS/RBAC permissions model is hard-coded with respect to the above roles.

<a href="#heading--the-rbac-maas-security-architecture"><h3 id="heading--the-rbac-maas-security-architecture">The MAAS/RBAC security architecture</h3></a>

Explain clearly, with graphics, the joint architecture of MAAS, Candid, and RBAC, including the specific function of each piece and any limitations introduced by the fact that MAAS use of RBAC is hard-coded to resource pools (thus not infinitely flexible).

<a href="#heading--rbac-users-and-groups"><h3 id="heading--rbac-users-and-groups">RBAC users and groups vs. MAAS resource pools</h3></a>

Explain clearly how RBAC users and groups are managed across the MAAS/RBAC architecture, and how these attributes control access to resource pools.

<a href="#heading--maas-rbac-roles"><h3 id="heading--maas-rbac-roles">MAAS RBAC roles</h3></a>

A user needs to understand the MAAS RBAC roles (user, administrator, operator, and auditor).  Explain clearly how each of these roles work; what actions each role is capable of performing; and how these roles are limited by the MAAS RBAC architecture.

<a href="#heading--how-the-four-maas-roles-protect-maas-resources"><h3 id="heading--how-the-four-maas-roles-protect-maas-resource">How the four MAAS RBAC roles protect MAAS resources</h3></a>

Users need to understanding how the four MAAS RBAC roles manage the correspondence of users, groups, and resource pools to protect MAAS resources.  Explain clearly, with graphics, the typical experience of each of the four MAAS RBAC groups over a range of typical scenarios.

<a href="#heading--about-candid"><h2 id="heading--about-candid">About Candid</h2></a>

In order to properly design your MAAS/RBAC instance, you need to understand Candid -- not only what it provides, but how it works.  Knowing the underlying features and operational parameters of Candid will help you better plan your use of RBAC with MAAS.

<a href="#heading--what-candid-does-and-doesnt-do"><h3 id="heading--what-candid-does-and-doesnt-do">What Candid does and doesn't do</h3></a>

Users need a clear understanding of what Candid does (e.g., creates macaroons) and doesn’t do (e.g., provide identity, authenticate users).  Explain, with graphics, a more detailed view of how Candid fits into the MAAS RBAC ecosystem, specifically which services it does and doesn’t provide.

<a href="#heading--how-candid-interfaces-to-security-tools"><h3 id="heading--how-candid-interfaces-to-security-tools">How Candid interfaces with authentication and identity tools</h3></a>

A user needs a clear understanding of how Candid supports integration with underlying authentication systems and identity providers, including conspicuous examples related to using Candid with RBAC and MAAS.  Explain clearly, in simple terms, how Candid integrates with underlying auth systems and identity provides, and what Candid generates for RBAC.

<a href="#heading--the-candid-api"><h3 id="heading--the-candid-api">The Candid API</h3></a>

A user needs a clear understanding of the Candid API, what it does, and how it assists RBAC in managing user actions for MAAS.  Explain clearly how the Candid API works, what services it provides, and how RBAC accesses this API to integrate Candid into the MAAS ecosystem.

<a href="#heading--about-designing-maas-security-with-rbac"><h2 id="heading--about-designing-maas-security-with-rbac">Designing MAAS security with RBAC</h2></a>

As a MAAS RBAC administrator, you need to design strong, properly-configured, role-based access controls for MAAS, using RBAC.  Understanding the gap that RBAC fills – and how it fills it – will better equip you to do this.

<a href="#heading--the-unique-function-of-rbac"><h3 id="heading--the-unique-function-of-rbac">The unique function of RBAC</h3></a>

Users need clear understanding of what RBAC does that Candid and MAAS do not do, and how it is integrated with both Candid and MAAS to fill these gaps.  Explain, with graphics, a more detailed view of how RBAC fits into the MAAS RBAC ecosystem, specifically which services it does and doesn’t provide, and how it interfaces with Candid and MAAS to provide these services.  

<a href="#heading--roles-permissions-and-domains"><h3 id="heading--roles-permissions-and-domains">Roles, permissions, and domains</h3></a>

Users should have a clear understanding of RBAC roles, permissions, and domains, and the way in which they are implemented in MAAS (resource pools, users, etc).  Explain clearly, in simple terms, how RBAC accesses and manages roles, permissions, and domains (resource pools), and how it mediates access by role.

<a href="#heading--permissions-and-permitted-actions"><h3 id="heading--permissions-and-permitted-actions">Permissions and permitted actions</h3></a>

A user must have a clear understanding of the various defined roles, permissions, rights, and permitted actions when using RBAC with MAAS.  Explain clearly how RBAC controls the actions (access) of each role across normal MAAS operations, using a suitable example (Navy fleet management, example MAAS already created).

<a href="#heading--rbac-logging"><h3 id="heading--rbac-logging">RBAC logging</h3></a>

Users should understand logging and how it helps to audit and review actions taken by MAAS users. Explain clearly how RBAC logs help to establish an audit trail across the MAAS instance over time.

Commit message:

[about-rbac.html] updated material on Candid, as far as possible without further research

src/about-rbac-6131.md, after:

<!-- "About RBAC" -->

# Work in progress
This work is not yet published, and thus cannot be relied upon by MAAS users.

<a href="#heading--multi-tenancy-in-maas"><h2 id="heading--multi-tenancy-in-maas">Multi-tenancy in MAAS</h2></a>

As a MAAS RBAC administrator, you need to understand multi-tenancy, because it will help you design and maintain useful and functional MAAS RBAC instances.  This means that you need an understanding of groups, roles, and resource pools – and how they connect via RBAC.

<a href="#heading--what-is-multi-tenancy"><h3 id="heading--what-is-multi-tenancy">What is multi-tenancy?</h3></a>

Multi-tenancy means that groups of users own a group of resources (machines) without knowing about other groups of users -- or their machines.  A common multi-tenancy use case provides different sets of machines for different users or groups of users. MAAS can achieve this, to some degree, by allowing users to allocate machines, but this approach has some drawbacks:

- Other administrative users can still see the allocated machines, as well as release and reallocate someone else's machines for themselves.
- Other administrative users can take administrative actions on someone else's machines (e.g., deployment).

To allow better machine access control, MAAS version 2.4 created resource pools.  By themselves, resource pools don't prevent one administrative user from manipulating someone else's machines.  Resource pools are integrated into the Canonical RBAC tool, making separation of privilege possible.

<a href="#heading--how-resource-pools-link-to-rbac"><h3 id="heading--how-resource-pools-link-to-rbac">How resource pools are integrated into RBAC</h3></a>

Resource pools are just a way of grouping machines.  Any given machine can be in exactly one resource pool.  This means that if you can control access to (and visibility of) resource pools, you can effectively control user access.

Note that just using resource pools to hide machines is a flawed access control approach, known as "security by obscurity."  What users don't know will hurt you when the users figure it out, and more often than not, they figure these things out entirely by accident.  There must also be some means of active authorisation that allows access to a resource pool, based on user identity, and there must be some way of controlling what the user can do with that resource pool.  In the parlance of standard security model, "what the user can do" would be called "privileges", but for the purposes of MAAS, we simply call them "permissions."  

<a href="#heading--the-rbac-permissions-model"><h3 id="heading--the-rbac-permissions-model">The RBAC permissions model</h3></a>

RBAC (Role-based access control) does not authenticate users or verify their identity; that depends on upstream tools.  RBAC does associate a given role with a properly-authenticated user identity.  With RBAC, permissions are associated with roles, not individual users, so the role assigned to a user when they authenticate controls what they can and cannot do.

This may seem like an unnecessary distinction, but it some key advantages:

- should a user wish to downgrade their privileges, e.g., so they won't accidentally do something destructive, this is possible without change the user's identity information.
- should a user's role change, requiring a change in privilege, the user account does not have to be modified to make this change.

From the point of view of MAAS, here is a thumbnail sketch of the permissions model:

- MAAS maintains resource pools, which are a machine attribute.  Every machine can be in one and only one resource pool.  Control access to a resource pool, and you control access to a machine.
- RBAC maintains roles, which are associated with user identities and permissions.  For a given user identity to carry out a particular operation in MAAS, that user identity must correspond to a role that has permission to carry out that operation.
- Some other tool (in this case, Candid) verifies the user identity.  If roles are to be effective, the user identity must be correct, and that identity must be verified before reaching RBAC.

The relationship between permissions and MAAS operations is hard coded into MAAS.  If RBAC is used, the code controlling each operation will verify with RBAC that the requesting user has a role that is permitted to perform that operation.

Over 400 permissions exist within MAAS that control whether or not the user can view, add, change, or delete anything from machines to partitions to script sets.  RBAC collects these permissions into four roles:

- Administrator: all permissions for all resource pools.
- Operator: all permissions for a specific resource pool, but not others.
- User: limited permissions, corresponding to the normal rights of a MAAS users.
- Auditor: permission to view data, only (i.e., read-only access).

MAAS code and RBAC code must work together to ensure that only users with the correct permissions are able to perform a specific operation; i.e., the MAAS/RBAC permissions model is hard-coded with respect to the above roles.

<a href="#heading--a-little-about-candid"><h3 id="heading--a-little-about-candid">A little about Candid</h3></a>

Candid is the [Canonical Identity service](https://github.com/mhilton/canonical-candid), an open-source [macaroon](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Macaroons_(computer_science))-based authentication service. Candid is not an [identity server](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Identity_provider), it just manages the users on a specified identity server.  An example of such an identity server could be LDAP, for example.

Candid can do the following things:

- find users by various identity parameters, such as e-mail, full name, last login time, etc.
- show details for a user, based on e-mail or username.
- add or remove users from ACLs (access control lists), or list members of an ACL.
- add or remove users from arbitrary groups.
- clear the multi-factor authentication (MFA) credentials for a specific user.
- manage Candid agents.

Candid can use certificates and agents, if desired.  You specify the identity provider by URL when instantiating the program.

<a href="#heading--the-rbac-maas-security-architecture"><h3 id="heading--the-rbac-maas-security-architecture">The MAAS/RBAC security architecture</h3></a>

Explain clearly, with graphics, the joint architecture of MAAS, Candid, and RBAC, including the specific function of each piece and any limitations introduced by the fact that MAAS use of RBAC is hard-coded to resource pools (thus not infinitely flexible).

<a href="#heading--rbac-users-and-groups"><h3 id="heading--rbac-users-and-groups">RBAC users and groups vs. MAAS resource pools</h3></a>

Explain clearly how RBAC users and groups are managed across the MAAS/RBAC architecture, and how these attributes control access to resource pools.

<a href="#heading--maas-rbac-roles"><h3 id="heading--maas-rbac-roles">MAAS RBAC roles</h3></a>

A user needs to understand the MAAS RBAC roles (user, administrator, operator, and auditor).  Explain clearly how each of these roles work; what actions each role is capable of performing; and how these roles are limited by the MAAS RBAC architecture.

<a href="#heading--how-the-four-maas-roles-protect-maas-resources"><h3 id="heading--how-the-four-maas-roles-protect-maas-resource">How the four MAAS RBAC roles protect MAAS resources</h3></a>

Users need to understanding how the four MAAS RBAC roles manage the correspondence of users, groups, and resource pools to protect MAAS resources.  Explain clearly, with graphics, the typical experience of each of the four MAAS RBAC groups over a range of typical scenarios.

<a href="#heading--about-candid"><h2 id="heading--about-candid">About Candid</h2></a>

In order to properly design your MAAS/RBAC instance, you need to understand Candid -- not only what it provides, but how it works.  Knowing the underlying features and operational parameters of Candid will help you better plan your use of RBAC with MAAS.

<a href="#heading--what-candid-does-and-doesnt-do"><h3 id="heading--what-candid-does-and-doesnt-do">What Candid does and doesn't do</h3></a>

Users need a clear understanding of what Candid does (e.g., creates macaroons) and doesn’t do (e.g., provide identity, authenticate users).  Explain, with graphics, a more detailed view of how Candid fits into the MAAS RBAC ecosystem, specifically which services it does and doesn’t provide.

<a href="#heading--how-candid-interfaces-to-security-tools"><h3 id="heading--how-candid-interfaces-to-security-tools">How Candid interfaces with authentication and identity tools</h3></a>

A user needs a clear understanding of how Candid supports integration with underlying authentication systems and identity providers, including conspicuous examples related to using Candid with RBAC and MAAS.  Explain clearly, in simple terms, how Candid integrates with underlying auth systems and identity provides, and what Candid generates for RBAC.

<a href="#heading--the-candid-api"><h3 id="heading--the-candid-api">The Candid API</h3></a>

A user needs a clear understanding of the Candid API, what it does, and how it assists RBAC in managing user actions for MAAS.  Explain clearly how the Candid API works, what services it provides, and how RBAC accesses this API to integrate Candid into the MAAS ecosystem.

<a href="#heading--about-designing-maas-security-with-rbac"><h2 id="heading--about-designing-maas-security-with-rbac">Designing MAAS security with RBAC</h2></a>

As a MAAS RBAC administrator, you need to design strong, properly-configured, role-based access controls for MAAS, using RBAC.  Understanding the gap that RBAC fills – and how it fills it – will better equip you to do this.

<a href="#heading--the-unique-function-of-rbac"><h3 id="heading--the-unique-function-of-rbac">The unique function of RBAC</h3></a>

Users need clear understanding of what RBAC does that Candid and MAAS do not do, and how it is integrated with both Candid and MAAS to fill these gaps.  Explain, with graphics, a more detailed view of how RBAC fits into the MAAS RBAC ecosystem, specifically which services it does and doesn’t provide, and how it interfaces with Candid and MAAS to provide these services.  

<a href="#heading--roles-permissions-and-domains"><h3 id="heading--roles-permissions-and-domains">Roles, permissions, and domains</h3></a>

Users should have a clear understanding of RBAC roles, permissions, and domains, and the way in which they are implemented in MAAS (resource pools, users, etc).  Explain clearly, in simple terms, how RBAC accesses and manages roles, permissions, and domains (resource pools), and how it mediates access by role.

<a href="#heading--permissions-and-permitted-actions"><h3 id="heading--permissions-and-permitted-actions">Permissions and permitted actions</h3></a>

A user must have a clear understanding of the various defined roles, permissions, rights, and permitted actions when using RBAC with MAAS.  Explain clearly how RBAC controls the actions (access) of each role across normal MAAS operations, using a suitable example (Navy fleet management, example MAAS already created).

<a href="#heading--rbac-logging"><h3 id="heading--rbac-logging">RBAC logging</h3></a>

Users should understand logging and how it helps to audit and review actions taken by MAAS users. Explain clearly how RBAC logs help to establish an audit trail across the MAAS instance over time.
