src/api-authentication-reference-5060.md, before:

The MAAS API uses [OAuth](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OAuth) as its authentication mechanism. This isn't third-party (3-legged) OAuth, so the process used is what's commonly referred to as 0-legged OAuth: the consumer accesses protected resources by submitting OAuth signed requests.

Note that some API endpoints support unauthenticated requests (i.e. anonymous access). See the [API documentation](https://maas.io/docs/api) for details. 

#### Two questions you may have:

1. [How can I perform authenticated requests in python?](#heading--python)
2. [How can I perform authenticated requests in ruby?](#heading--ruby)

Here are two examples on how to perform an authenticated GET request to retrieve the list of nodes. The &lt;key&gt;, &lt;secret&gt;, &lt;consumer_key&gt; tokens are the three elements that compose the API key (API key = '&lt;consumer_key&gt;:&lt;key&gt;:&lt;secret&gt;').

<a href="#heading--python"><h2 id="heading--python">Python</h2></a>

``` python
import oauth.oauth as oauth
import httplib2
import uuid

def perform_API_request(site, uri, method, key, secret, consumer_key):
    resource_tok_string = "oauth_token_secret=%s&oauth_token=%s" % (
        secret, key)
    resource_token = oauth.OAuthToken.from_string(resource_tok_string)
    consumer_token = oauth.OAuthConsumer(consumer_key, "")

    oauth_request = oauth.OAuthRequest.from_consumer_and_token(
        consumer_token, token=resource_token, http_url=site,
        parameters={'oauth_nonce': uuid.uuid4().hex})
    oauth_request.sign_request(
        oauth.OAuthSignatureMethod_PLAINTEXT(), consumer_token,
        resource_token)
    headers = oauth_request.to_header()
    url = "%s%s" % (site, uri)
    http = httplib2.Http()
    return http.request(url, method, body=None, headers=headers)

# API key = '<consumer_key>:<key>:<secret>'
response = perform_API_request(
    'http://server/MAAS/api/1.0', '/nodes/?op=list', 'GET', '<key>', '<secret>',
    '<consumer_key>')
```

<a href="#heading--ruby"><h2 id="heading--ruby">Ruby</h2></a>

``` ruby
require 'oauth'
require 'oauth/signature/plaintext'

def perform_API_request(site, uri, key, secret, consumer_key)
    consumer = OAuth::Consumer.new(
        consumer_key, "",
        { :site => "http://localhost/MAAS/api/1.0",
          :scheme => :header, :signature_method => "PLAINTEXT"})
    access_token = OAuth::AccessToken.new(consumer, key, secret)
    return access_token.request(:get, "/nodes/?op=list")
end

# API key = "<consumer_key>:<key>:<secret>"
response = perform_API_request(
     "http://server/MAAS/api/1.0", "/nodes/?op=list", "<key>", "<secret>",
     "consumer_key>")
```

Commit message:

Post RAD > tabs double-check fixes (links, spelling, grammar, etc) on these files: src/about-maas-5064.md                        |  2 +- src/about-machines-5080.md                    |  4 +-- src/about-networking-5084.md                  |  2 +- src/about-tcp-ip-networks-5806.md             | 10 +++--- src/about-vm-hosting-5068.md                  |  4 +-- src/api-authentication-reference-5060.md      | 45 ++++++++++----------------- src/commissioning-scripts-reference-5375.md   |  2 +- src/how-to-deploy-machines-5112.md            |  2 +- src/how-to-enable-tls-encryption-5116.md      |  2 +- src/how-to-help-improve-the-doc-4186.md       |  6 +--- src/how-to-import-images-5124.md              |  8 ++--- src/how-to-install-maas-5128.md               |  4 +-- src/how-to-manage-machine-interfaces-5156.md  | 16 +++++----- src/how-to-manage-machines-5160.md            |  4 +-- src/how-to-manage-proxies-5168.md             |  4 +-- src/how-to-manage-racks-5172.md               |  4 +-- src/how-to-manage-user-accounts-5184.md       |  6 ++++ src/how-to-manage-vm-hosts-5140.md            |  2 +- src/how-to-manage-vmware-images-5144.md       |  6 ++-- src/how-to-mirror-images-locally-5188.md      |  2 +- src/how-to-search-maas-5192.md                |  2 +- src/how-to-set-up-maas-metrics-5204.md        |  2 +- src/how-to-use-lxd-5208.md                    |  4 +-- src/how-to-use-the-maas-cli-5236.md           |  4 +-- src/maas-concepts-and-terms-reference-5416.md |  2 +- src/power-management-reference-5246.md        |  2 ++ src/tips-and-tricks-5329.md                   |  2 +- src/what-is-new-with-maas-5292.md             | 20 ++++++------

src/api-authentication-reference-5060.md, after:

The MAAS API uses [OAuth](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OAuth) as its authentication mechanism. This isn't third-party (3-legged) OAuth, so the process used is what's commonly referred to as 0-legged OAuth: the consumer accesses protected resources by submitting OAuth signed requests.

Note that some API endpoints support unauthenticated requests (i.e. anonymous access). See the [API documentation](https://maas.io/docs/api) for details. 

#### Two questions you may have:

1. [How can I perform authenticated requests in python?](#heading--python)
2. [How can I perform authenticated requests in ruby?](#heading--ruby)

Here are two examples on how to perform an authenticated GET request to retrieve the list of nodes. The &lt;consumer_key&gt;, &lt;consumer_token&gt;, &lt;secret&gt; tokens are the three elements that compose the API key (API key = '&lt;consumer_key&gt;:&lt;consumer_token&gt;:&lt;secret&gt;').

<a href="#heading--python"><h2 id="heading--python">Python</h2></a>

Note: the below example uses [fades](https://fades.readthedocs.io/en/stable/), but you can also install the `requests_oauthlib` ([pypi link](https://pypi.org/project/requests-oauthlib/)) and `oauthlib` ([pypi link](https://pypi.org/project/oauthlib/)) packages with `pip`. Replace `<MAAS_SERVER_IP>` with your server's IP address, and `<API-KEY>` with your API key.

``` python
from oauthlib.oauth1 import SIGNATURE_PLAINTEXT # fades
from requests_oauthlib import OAuth1Session # fades

MAAS_HOST = "http://<MAAS_SERVER_IP>:5240/MAAS"
CONSUMER_KEY, CONSUMER_TOKEN, SECRET = "<API-KEY>".split(":")

maas = OAuth1Session(CONSUMER_KEY, resource_owner_key=CONSUMER_TOKEN, resource_owner_secret=SECRET, signature_method=SIGNATURE_PLAINTEXT)

nodes = maas.get(f"{MAAS_HOST}/api/2.0/machines/", params={"op": "list_allocated"})
nodes.raise_for_status()

print(nodes.json())
```

<a href="#heading--ruby"><h2 id="heading--ruby">Ruby</h2></a>

``` ruby
require 'oauth'
require 'oauth/signature/plaintext'

def perform_API_request(site, uri, key, secret, consumer_key)
    consumer = OAuth::Consumer.new(
        consumer_key, "",
        { :site => "http://localhost:5240/MAAS/api/2.0",
          :scheme => :header, :signature_method => "PLAINTEXT"})
    access_token = OAuth::AccessToken.new(consumer, key, secret)
    return access_token.request(:get, "/nodes/?op=list")
end

# API key = "<consumer_key>:<key>:<secret>"
response = perform_API_request(
     "http://server:5240/MAAS/api/2.0", "/nodes/?op=list", "<key>", "<secret>",
     "consumer_key>")
```
