src/how-to-manage-availability-zones-5152.md, before:

<!-- "How to manage availability zones" -->
An availability zone is an organisational unit containing nodes, where each node is in exactly one zone. While in production, a machine can be allocated from a specific zone.  Availability zones can be used for fault-tolerance, service performance, and power management. See [Zone examples](/t/how-to-set-up-networks/6174#heading--about-availability-zones) for more details.

A newly installed MAAS comes with a default zone which initially contains all nodes. You cannot remove the 'default' zone or change its name, but you can create new zones and assign machine to them. This article will help you learn:

- [How to list availability zones](#heading--list-zones)
- [How to add an availability zone](#heading--add-a-zone)
- [How to edit an existing availability zone](#heading--edit-a-zone)
- [How to delete an existing availability zone](#heading--delete-a-zone)
- [How to assign a machine to an availability zone](#heading--assign-a-node-to-a-zone)
- [How to allocate a machine in a particular zone](#heading--allocate-a-node-in-a-zone)

[tabs]
[tab version="v3.3 Snap,v3.3 Packages,v3.2 Snap,v3.2 Packages,v3.1 Snap,v3.1 Packages,v3.0 Snap,v3.0 Packages,v2.9 Snap,v2.9 Packages" view="UI"]
<a href="#heading--list-zones"><h2 id="heading--list-zones">How to list availability zones</h2></a>

To see a list of availability zones, choose "AZs" from the top menu:

<a href="https://discourse.maas.io/uploads/default/original/1X/5ac446f2bda76276069fe5a1c302ff2acbf425a2.jpeg" target = "_blank"><img src="https://discourse.maas.io/uploads/default/original/1X/5ac446f2bda76276069fe5a1c302ff2acbf425a2.jpeg"></a>

<a href="#heading--add-a-zone"><h2 id="heading--add-a-zone">How to add an availability zone</h2></a>

To create a zone, navigate to the 'AZs' page of the web UI and use the 'Add AZ' button. Enter a name for the zone and click 'Add AZ'.

<a href="https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/f4032f39-manage-zones__2.4_add-zone.png" target = "_blank"><img src="https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/f4032f39-manage-zones__2.4_add-zone.png"></a>

<a href="#heading--edit-a-zone"><h2 id="heading--edit-a-zone">How to edit an existing availability zone</h2></a>

To edit a zone, on the 'AZs' page, select a zone and use the 'Edit' button:

<a href="https://discourse.maas.io/uploads/default/original/1X/cf5c2b91e0c3e97ec3f5a813c8a2ed85e9139e19.jpeg" target = "_blank"><img src="https://discourse.maas.io/uploads/default/original/1X/cf5c2b91e0c3e97ec3f5a813c8a2ed85e9139e19.jpeg"></a>

This selection allows you to change the name and description for the added (or edited) zone:

<a href="https://discourse.maas.io/uploads/default/original/1X/11fb5b6c13609a7ef976aa301e02f43422080066.jpeg" target = "_blank"><img src="https://discourse.maas.io/uploads/default/original/1X/11fb5b6c13609a7ef976aa301e02f43422080066.jpeg"></a>

<a href="#heading--delete-a-zone"><h2 id="heading--delete-a-zone">How to delete an existing availability zone</h2></a>

To delete a zone, on the 'AZs' page, select a zone and use the 'Delete AZ' button. Doing so will also move any potential machine associations to the default zone.

<a href="https://discourse.maas.io/uploads/default/original/1X/afb0576940f2e20266dc907911f837378958a64a.jpeg" target = "_blank"><img src="https://discourse.maas.io/uploads/default/original/1X/afb0576940f2e20266dc907911f837378958a64a.jpeg"></a>

<a href="#heading--assign-a-node-to-a-zone"><h2 id="heading--assign-a-node-to-a-zone">How to assign a machine to an availability zone</h2></a>

To assign a machine to a zone, from the 'Machines' page, select a machine (or multiple machines) and choose 'Set zone' using the 'Take action' button:

<a href="https://discourse.maas.io/uploads/default/original/1X/97db7cbfd8059d2c67566a065e08c56a20b58071.jpeg" target = "_blank"><img src="https://discourse.maas.io/uploads/default/original/1X/97db7cbfd8059d2c67566a065e08c56a20b58071.jpeg"></a>

After selecting a zone hit the 'Set zone...' button to apply the change.

You can also edit a machine's 'Configuration' page to change its zone.
[/tab]
[tab version="v3.3 Snap,v3.3 Packages,v3.2 Snap,v3.2 Packages,v3.1 Snap,v3.1 Packages,v3.0 Snap,v3.0 Packages,v2.9 Snap,v2.9 Packages" view="CLI"]

<a href="#heading--list-zones"><h2 id="heading--list-zones">How to list availability zones</h2></a>

To see a list of availability zones, enter the following command:

```
maas $PROFILE zones read \
| jq -r '(["ZONE","NAME","DESCRIPTION"]
| (., map(length*"-"))), (.[] | [.id, .name, .description])
| @tsv' | column -t
```

which produces output similar to:

```
ZONE  NAME         DESCRIPTION
----  ----         -----------
5     BizOffice
1     default
4     Inventory
2     Medications
3     Payroll
6     ProServ
```

<a href="#heading--add-a-zone"><h2 id="heading--add-a-zone">How to add an availability zone</h2></a>

To create a zone, enter the following command:

```
maas $PROFILE zones create name=$ZONE_NAME description=$ZONE_DESCRIPTION
```

<a href="#heading--edit-a-zone"><h2 id="heading--edit-a-zone">How to edit an existing availability zone</h2></a>

To edit a zone, enter a command similar to the following:

```
maas $PROFILE zone update $OLD_ZONE_NAME name=$NEW_ZONE_NAME \
description=$ZONE_DESCRIPTION
```

<a href="#heading--delete-a-zone"><h2 id="heading--delete-a-zone">How to delete an existing availability zone</h2></a>

To delete a zone, enter a command like this:

```
maas $PROFILE zone delete $ZONE_NAME
```

<a href="#heading--assign-a-node-to-a-zone"><h2 id="heading--assign-a-node-to-a-zone">How to assign a machine to an availability zone</h2></a>

To assign a machine to a zone, first retrieve the machine's system ID like this:

```
maas PROFILE machines read | jq '.[] | .hostname, .system_id'
```

Then enter the following command, using the system ID you just retrieved:

```
maas admin machine update $SYSTEM_ID zone=$ZONE_NAME
```
[/tab]
[/tabs]

<a href="#heading--allocate-a-node-in-a-zone"><h2 id="heading--allocate-a-node-in-a-zone">How to allocate a machine in a particular zone</h2></a>

Allocating a machine in a particular zone can only be done via the MAAS CLI.

To deploy in a particular zone, call the `acquire` method in the region-controller API &lt;region-controller-api&gt; as before, but pass the `zone` parameter with the name of the zone. This method will allocate a machine in that zone, or fail with an HTTP 409 ("conflict") error if the zone has no machines available that match your request.

Alternatively, you may want to request a machine that is not in a particular zone or one that is not in any of several zones. To do that, specify the `not_in_zone` parameter to `acquire`. This parameter takes a list of zone names; the allocated machine will not be in any of them. Again, if that leaves no machines available that match your request, the call will return a "conflict" error.

It is possible, though not usually useful, to combine the `zone` and `not_in_zone` parameters. If your choice for `zone` is also present in `not_in_zone`, no machine will ever match your request. Or if it's not, then the `not_in_zone` values will not affect the result of the call at all.

Commit message:

[how-to-manage-availability-zones.html] update this how-to to point back at the about article

src/how-to-manage-availability-zones-5152.md, after:

<!-- "How to manage availability zones" -->
An availability zone is an organisational unit containing nodes, where each node is in exactly one zone. While in production, a machine can be allocated from a specific zone.  Availability zones can be used for fault-tolerance, service performance, and power management. See [Zone examples](/t/how-to-set-up-networks/6174#heading--about-availability-zones) for more details.

A newly installed MAAS comes with a default zone which initially contains all nodes. You cannot remove the 'default' zone or change its name, but you can create new zones and assign machine to them. This article will help you learn:

- [How to list availability zones](#heading--list-zones)
- [How to add an availability zone](#heading--add-a-zone)
- [How to edit an existing availability zone](#heading--edit-a-zone)
- [How to delete an existing availability zone](#heading--delete-a-zone)
- [How to assign a machine to an availability zone](#heading--assign-a-node-to-a-zone)
- [How to allocate a machine in a particular zone](#heading--allocate-a-node-in-a-zone)

You can find more theory about availability zones [elsewhere in this documentation set](/t/how-to-set-up-networks/6174#heading--about-availability-zones).

[tabs]
[tab version="v3.3 Snap,v3.3 Packages,v3.2 Snap,v3.2 Packages,v3.1 Snap,v3.1 Packages,v3.0 Snap,v3.0 Packages,v2.9 Snap,v2.9 Packages" view="UI"]
<a href="#heading--list-zones"><h2 id="heading--list-zones">How to list availability zones</h2></a>

To see a list of availability zones, choose "AZs" from the top menu:

<a href="https://discourse.maas.io/uploads/default/original/1X/5ac446f2bda76276069fe5a1c302ff2acbf425a2.jpeg" target = "_blank"><img src="https://discourse.maas.io/uploads/default/original/1X/5ac446f2bda76276069fe5a1c302ff2acbf425a2.jpeg"></a>

<a href="#heading--add-a-zone"><h2 id="heading--add-a-zone">How to add an availability zone</h2></a>

To create a zone, navigate to the 'AZs' page of the web UI and use the 'Add AZ' button. Enter a name for the zone and click 'Add AZ'.

<a href="https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/f4032f39-manage-zones__2.4_add-zone.png" target = "_blank"><img src="https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/f4032f39-manage-zones__2.4_add-zone.png"></a>

<a href="#heading--edit-a-zone"><h2 id="heading--edit-a-zone">How to edit an existing availability zone</h2></a>

To edit a zone, on the 'AZs' page, select a zone and use the 'Edit' button:

<a href="https://discourse.maas.io/uploads/default/original/1X/cf5c2b91e0c3e97ec3f5a813c8a2ed85e9139e19.jpeg" target = "_blank"><img src="https://discourse.maas.io/uploads/default/original/1X/cf5c2b91e0c3e97ec3f5a813c8a2ed85e9139e19.jpeg"></a>

This selection allows you to change the name and description for the added (or edited) zone:

<a href="https://discourse.maas.io/uploads/default/original/1X/11fb5b6c13609a7ef976aa301e02f43422080066.jpeg" target = "_blank"><img src="https://discourse.maas.io/uploads/default/original/1X/11fb5b6c13609a7ef976aa301e02f43422080066.jpeg"></a>

<a href="#heading--delete-a-zone"><h2 id="heading--delete-a-zone">How to delete an existing availability zone</h2></a>

To delete a zone, on the 'AZs' page, select a zone and use the 'Delete AZ' button. Doing so will also move any potential machine associations to the default zone.

<a href="https://discourse.maas.io/uploads/default/original/1X/afb0576940f2e20266dc907911f837378958a64a.jpeg" target = "_blank"><img src="https://discourse.maas.io/uploads/default/original/1X/afb0576940f2e20266dc907911f837378958a64a.jpeg"></a>

<a href="#heading--assign-a-node-to-a-zone"><h2 id="heading--assign-a-node-to-a-zone">How to assign a machine to an availability zone</h2></a>

To assign a machine to a zone, from the 'Machines' page, select a machine (or multiple machines) and choose 'Set zone' using the 'Take action' button:

<a href="https://discourse.maas.io/uploads/default/original/1X/97db7cbfd8059d2c67566a065e08c56a20b58071.jpeg" target = "_blank"><img src="https://discourse.maas.io/uploads/default/original/1X/97db7cbfd8059d2c67566a065e08c56a20b58071.jpeg"></a>

After selecting a zone hit the 'Set zone...' button to apply the change.

You can also edit a machine's 'Configuration' page to change its zone.
[/tab]
[tab version="v3.3 Snap,v3.3 Packages,v3.2 Snap,v3.2 Packages,v3.1 Snap,v3.1 Packages,v3.0 Snap,v3.0 Packages,v2.9 Snap,v2.9 Packages" view="CLI"]

<a href="#heading--list-zones"><h2 id="heading--list-zones">How to list availability zones</h2></a>

To see a list of availability zones, enter the following command:

```
maas $PROFILE zones read \
| jq -r '(["ZONE","NAME","DESCRIPTION"]
| (., map(length*"-"))), (.[] | [.id, .name, .description])
| @tsv' | column -t
```

which produces output similar to:

```
ZONE  NAME         DESCRIPTION
----  ----         -----------
5     BizOffice
1     default
4     Inventory
2     Medications
3     Payroll
6     ProServ
```

<a href="#heading--add-a-zone"><h2 id="heading--add-a-zone">How to add an availability zone</h2></a>

To create a zone, enter the following command:

```
maas $PROFILE zones create name=$ZONE_NAME description=$ZONE_DESCRIPTION
```

<a href="#heading--edit-a-zone"><h2 id="heading--edit-a-zone">How to edit an existing availability zone</h2></a>

To edit a zone, enter a command similar to the following:

```
maas $PROFILE zone update $OLD_ZONE_NAME name=$NEW_ZONE_NAME \
description=$ZONE_DESCRIPTION
```

<a href="#heading--delete-a-zone"><h2 id="heading--delete-a-zone">How to delete an existing availability zone</h2></a>

To delete a zone, enter a command like this:

```
maas $PROFILE zone delete $ZONE_NAME
```

<a href="#heading--assign-a-node-to-a-zone"><h2 id="heading--assign-a-node-to-a-zone">How to assign a machine to an availability zone</h2></a>

To assign a machine to a zone, first retrieve the machine's system ID like this:

```
maas PROFILE machines read | jq '.[] | .hostname, .system_id'
```

Then enter the following command, using the system ID you just retrieved:

```
maas admin machine update $SYSTEM_ID zone=$ZONE_NAME
```
[/tab]
[/tabs]

<a href="#heading--allocate-a-node-in-a-zone"><h2 id="heading--allocate-a-node-in-a-zone">How to allocate a machine in a particular zone</h2></a>

Allocating a machine in a particular zone can only be done via the MAAS CLI.

To deploy in a particular zone, call the `acquire` method in the region-controller API &lt;region-controller-api&gt; as before, but pass the `zone` parameter with the name of the zone. This method will allocate a machine in that zone, or fail with an HTTP 409 ("conflict") error if the zone has no machines available that match your request.

Alternatively, you may want to request a machine that is not in a particular zone or one that is not in any of several zones. To do that, specify the `not_in_zone` parameter to `acquire`. This parameter takes a list of zone names; the allocated machine will not be in any of them. Again, if that leaves no machines available that match your request, the call will return a "conflict" error.

It is possible, though not usually useful, to combine the `zone` and `not_in_zone` parameters. If your choice for `zone` is also present in `not_in_zone`, no machine will ever match your request. Or if it's not, then the `not_in_zone` values will not affect the result of the call at all.
