src/how-to-work-with-audit-event-logs-5987.md, before:

<!-- "Audit event log reference" -->
There are many user-initiated events in MAAS that an administrator or a user may want to audit. These include someone updating the settings or changing a user's permissions. This page details how to query these events and includes examples of how to perform a query, and the type of data logs can provide.

#### Three questions you may have:

1. [How do I list audit events for all users?](#heading--list-audit-events-for-all-users)
2. [How do I list audit events for a specific user?](#heading--list-audit-events-for-a-specific-user)
3. [What are the types of audit event logs available?](#heading--types-of-audit-event-logs)

<a href="#heading--list-audit-events-for-all-users"><h2 id="heading--list-audit-events-for-all-users">List audit events for all users</h2></a>

To list events for all users, use the following syntax:

``` bash
maas $PROFILE events query level=AUDIT
```

Note: Non-administrators will only see their own audit event logs listed.

The following is example output from the previous command, using admin as the MAAS profile:

``` no-highlight
Success.
Machine-readable output follows:
{
    "count": 1,
    "events": [
        {
            "username": "admin",
            "node": null,
            "hostname": "",
            "id": 2569,
            "level": "AUDIT",
            "created": "Thu, 01 Feb. 2018 22:28:18",
            "type": "Authorisation",
            "description": "User admin logged in."
        }
    ],
    "next_uri": "/MAAS/api/2.0/events/?op=query&level=AUDIT&after=2569",
    "prev_uri": "/MAAS/api/2.0/events/?op=query&level=AUDIT&before=2558"
}
```

The above output shows that there is currently only one audit event log for the user `admin`, and that MAAS created this log when they logged into the web UI.

<a href="#heading--list-audit-events-for-a-specific-user"><h2 id="heading--list-audit-events-for-a-specific-user">List audit events for a specific user</h2></a>

To list the audit event logs for a specific user that you have permissions for, supply the `owner=$USERNAME` parameter to the query command:

``` bash
maas $PROFILE events query level=AUDIT owner=$USERNAME
```

As there is only one audit event log in the database (as seen above), generate some more by performing these four actions:

1. Create new non-administrator user `johnnybegood` with `admin` user
2. Logout of web UI as `admin` user and login with `johnnybegood` user
3. Change password of the `johnnybegood` user
4. Log back into the web UI (Django forces a re-login when currently logged in user changes their password).

Let's take a look and see what type of audit event logs we have now, filtering with `owner=johnnybegood` as shown in the following command:

``` bash
maas admin events query level=AUDIT owner=johnnybegood
```

``` bash
Success.
Machine-readable output follows:
{
    "count": 3,
    "events": [
        {
            "username": "johnnybegood",
            "node": null,
            "hostname": "",
            "id": 2877,
            "level": "AUDIT",
            "created": "Mon, 12 Feb. 2018 22:34:46",
            "type": "Authorisation",
            "description": "User 'johnnybegood' logged in."
        },
        {
            "username": "johnnybegood",
            "node": null,
            "hostname": "",
            "id": 2876,
            "level": "AUDIT",
            "created": "Mon, 12 Feb. 2018 22:34:35",
            "type": "Authorisation",
            "description": "Password changed for 'johnnybegood'."
        },
        {
            "username": "johnnybegood",
            "node": null,
            "hostname": "",
            "id": 2875,
            "level": "AUDIT",
            "created": "Mon, 12 Feb. 2018 22:33:56",
            "type": "Authorisation",
            "description": "User 'johnnybegood' logged in."
        }
    ],
    "next_uri": "/MAAS/api/2.0/events/?op=query&level=AUDIT&owner=johnnybegood&after=2877",
    "prev_uri": "/MAAS/api/2.0/events/?op=query&level=AUDIT&owner=johnnybegood&before=2875"
}
```

As we can see above, only audit event logs for the user `johnnybegood` are generated. These events show the following eight items:

1. The user for the event
2. Whether or not the event is associated with a particular node
3. The node's hostname
4. The event id
5. The level of the event
6. when MAAS created the event
7. The event type
8. The event description

<a href="#heading--types-of-audit-event-logs"><h2 id="heading--types-of-audit-event-logs">Types of audit event logs available</h2></a>

Here is a list of the nine types of audit event logs that are currently supported by MAAS:

1. Password changes
2. Permission changes
3. API (OAuth) tokens created/deleted
4. Login and logouts
5. SSH keys imported from GitHub or Launchpad
6. SSL key changes
7. User profile changes
8. Commissioning script changes
9. Test script changes

Commit message:

[how-to-work-with-audit-event-logs.html] create how-to page for audit events

src/how-to-work-with-audit-event-logs-5987.md, after:

<!-- "How to work with audit event logs" -->
There are many user-initiated events in MAAS that an administrator or a user may want to audit. These include someone updating the settings or changing a user's permissions. This page details how to query these events and includes examples of how to perform a query, and the type of data logs can provide.

This article will help you learn:

* [How to list audit events for all users](#heading--list-audit-events-for-all-users)
* [How to list audit events for a specific user](#heading--list-audit-events-for-a-specific-user)

<a href="#heading--list-audit-events-for-all-users"><h2 id="heading--list-audit-events-for-all-users">How to list audit events for all users</h2></a>

To list events for all users, use the following syntax:

``` bash
maas $PROFILE events query level=AUDIT
```

Note: Non-administrators will only see their own audit event logs listed.

The following is example output from the previous command, using admin as the MAAS profile:

``` no-highlight
Success.
Machine-readable output follows:
{
    "count": 1,
    "events": [
        {
            "username": "admin",
            "node": null,
            "hostname": "",
            "id": 2569,
            "level": "AUDIT",
            "created": "Thu, 01 Feb. 2018 22:28:18",
            "type": "Authorisation",
            "description": "User admin logged in."
        }
    ],
    "next_uri": "/MAAS/api/2.0/events/?op=query&level=AUDIT&after=2569",
    "prev_uri": "/MAAS/api/2.0/events/?op=query&level=AUDIT&before=2558"
}
```

The above output shows that there is currently only one audit event log for the user `admin`, and that MAAS created this log when they logged into the web UI.

<a href="#heading--list-audit-events-for-a-specific-user"><h2 id="heading--list-audit-events-for-a-specific-user">How to list audit events for a specific user</h2></a>

To list the audit event logs for a specific user that you have permissions for, supply the `owner=$USERNAME` parameter to the query command:

``` bash
maas $PROFILE events query level=AUDIT owner=$USERNAME
```

As there is only one audit event log in the database (as seen above), generate some more by performing these four actions:

1. Create new non-administrator user `johnnybegood` with `admin` user
2. Logout of web UI as `admin` user and login with `johnnybegood` user
3. Change password of the `johnnybegood` user
4. Log back into the web UI (Django forces a re-login when currently logged in user changes their password).

Let's take a look and see what type of audit event logs we have now, filtering with `owner=johnnybegood` as shown in the following command:

``` bash
maas admin events query level=AUDIT owner=johnnybegood
```

``` bash
Success.
Machine-readable output follows:
{
    "count": 3,
    "events": [
        {
            "username": "johnnybegood",
            "node": null,
            "hostname": "",
            "id": 2877,
            "level": "AUDIT",
            "created": "Mon, 12 Feb. 2018 22:34:46",
            "type": "Authorisation",
            "description": "User 'johnnybegood' logged in."
        },
        {
            "username": "johnnybegood",
            "node": null,
            "hostname": "",
            "id": 2876,
            "level": "AUDIT",
            "created": "Mon, 12 Feb. 2018 22:34:35",
            "type": "Authorisation",
            "description": "Password changed for 'johnnybegood'."
        },
        {
            "username": "johnnybegood",
            "node": null,
            "hostname": "",
            "id": 2875,
            "level": "AUDIT",
            "created": "Mon, 12 Feb. 2018 22:33:56",
            "type": "Authorisation",
            "description": "User 'johnnybegood' logged in."
        }
    ],
    "next_uri": "/MAAS/api/2.0/events/?op=query&level=AUDIT&owner=johnnybegood&after=2877",
    "prev_uri": "/MAAS/api/2.0/events/?op=query&level=AUDIT&owner=johnnybegood&before=2875"
}
```

As we can see above, only audit event logs for the user `johnnybegood` are generated. These events show the following eight items:

1. The user for the event
2. Whether or not the event is associated with a particular node
3. The node's hostname
4. The event id
5. The level of the event
6. when MAAS created the event
7. The event type
8. The event description
