src/how-to-use-vault-to-protect-your-maas-secrets-6534.md, before:

<!-- "How to use Vault to protect your MAAS secrets" -->

As a MAAS administrator, you do not want secrets associated with a MAAS instance to be stored in the database, since it often doesn’t comply with security regulations.  Examples of the MAAS settings which contain secrets are the OMAPI key and the RPC secret. Beginning with version 3.3, MAAS secrets should instead be stored in [HashiCorp Vault](https://www.hashicorp.com/products/vault).

Examples of such secrets are

- Database connection credentials
- Shared RPC key
- OMAPI key
- BMC power credentials (password, keys and certificates) for machines
- VMhost credentials
- Macaroon keys


<a href="#heading--Configuring-Vault-for-MAAS"><h2 id="heading--Configuring-Vault-for-MAAS">Configuring Vault for MAAS</h2></a>

For MAAS to be able to integrate with Vault, a few steps are required.  Specifically, you must get a role_id and wrapped_token via Vault CLI (follow the instructions from [Hashicorp Vault](https://learn.hashicorp.com/tutorials/vault/approle-best-practices?in=vault/auth-methods#approle-response-wrapping)).

As a summary only, these can be performed by a Vault admin using the `vault` CLI.

1) The `approle` engine must be enabled. This can be checked with:

```nohighlight
$ vault auth list
```

You should verify that it's mounted under `approle/`.  If not, it can be enabled via:

```nohighlight
$ vault auth enable approle
```

2) The KV v2 engine is mounted under the desired path (`secret/` by default, but can be configured as desired). A new KV engine can be mounted with:

```nohighlight
$ vault secrets enable -path $SECRETS_MOUNT kv-v2
```

3) An appropriate policy that can be assigned to approles configured in MAAS should be configured, providing read/write access to the secrets paths that MAAS will use.  As an example, here is a minimal policy:

```nohighlight
path "$SECRETS_MOUNT/metadata/$SECRETS_PATH/" {
	capabilities = ["list"]
}

path "$SECRETS_MOUNT/metadata/$SECRETS_PATH/*" {
	capabilities = ["read", "update", "delete", "list"]
}

path "$SECRETS_MOUNT/data/${SECRETS_PATH}/*" {
	capabilities = ["read", "create", "update", "delete"]
}
```
Here, `$SECRETS_PATH` is the desired path prefix under which MAAS will store secrets. This, together with `$SECRETS_MOUNT`, will be used when configuring MAAS later. Such a policy can be created in Vault as follows (assuming it was written to `$POLICY_FILE`):

```nohighlight
$ vault policy write $MAAS_POLICY $POLICY_FILE
```

4) For each MAAS region controller, create a role using the policy created above:

```nohighlight
$ vault write auth/approle/role/$ROLE_NAME \
policies=$MAAS_POLICY token_ttl=5m
```

Tthe TTL for tokens can be tweaked as desired.

While it's technically possible to use the same approle for all controllers, it's suggested to use different ones for each.  This increases security and reduces exposure in case credentials are leaked from one controller.

Fetch the role ID for the created role with the following command:

```nohighlight
$ vault read auth/approle/role/$ROLE_NAME/role-id
```

5) For each created role, create a secret ID, returned with a wrapping token. This, together with the role ID, will be provided to the MAAS controller:

```nohighlight
$ vault write -wrap-ttl=5m auth/approle/role/$ROLE_NAME/secret-id
```

<a href="#heading--Integrating-Vault-with-MAAS"><h2 id="heading--Integrating-Vault-with-MAAS">Integrating Vault with MAAS</h2></a>

Once MAAS is installed and configured, it's possible to integrate it with Vault with a few steps, using the CLI:

```nohighlight
sudo maas config-vault configure $URL $APPROLE_ID $WRAPPED_TOKEN $SECRETS_PATH --secrets-mount $SECRET_MOUNT
```
where the `$APPROLE_ID` and `$WRAPPED_TOKEN` are the ones obtained by Vault in the previous steps.

[note]
This operation must be performed on each region controller before the integration process can continue.
[/note]

Once this operation has been performed on all region controllers, it's possible to migrate secrets to Vault and complete the integration process, with the following command:

```nohighlight
$ sudo maas config-vault migrate
```
During migration, MAAS might be offline for a few seconds, but it will refresh quickly.  After this command, MAAS will be fully integrated and functional with Vault. You can confirm success in the UI by checking **Settings --> Configuration --> Security**:

![|649x586](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/6huwJZKrnraNHM3hiiVGcrTgOSHD_b0KJOLL1N4s05rKnhQ09UYgMdQHuo5MT_N3lqKn02C_Qg7RQmfrELC4Xjj1pOjIo-N4mMBB8oRj1mfPLbyuw5oKO6jNvvAtUQxwrnKww5DDT1IYDfh9jFCwIoy6MLnOR831kzYHVsgDASfUNEMAW-dwJNdSAt_xTA)

[note] 
If you try to migrate secrets before all region controllers are configured with Vault, the migrate command will fail with an error message.
[/note]

If you've configured all region controllers with Vault, but haven't yet migrated the secrets, the integration process will simply remain incomplete.  The UI will remind you:

![|670x338](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/v2_glOaBx8hTy7TmhD3Y5qe34iFePJN5Z46ZeY6UvGXF7eD4m7chplXtbKIKZMchs2D5WAJSit0tlH27onPV1oUnLZVKwyVOncje3QaZ0n4d-1sjTV5sfuQFopuql_COE0FfvDSFTcKeElnThC3_gKIg6YlNQ-JKvLH6t9sgp6UwrTPAnHzoGpQ6eSmeBQ)

<a href="#heading--When-the-Vault-is-sealed"><h2 id="heading--When-the-Vault-is-sealed">When the Vault is unreachable</h2></a>

There are two conditions that may cause secrets to become unavailable: when the Vault is sealed, and when the Vault is unreachable through misconfiguration or other failure.

When the Vault is sealed, all queries involving secrets will fail with a user error mentioning that the Vault has been sealed.  Unsealing the Vault requires operator intervention.  MAAS will indicate when this is needed.

Vault may become unreachable due to a network failure, due to incorrect configuration of a region controller, or other unintentional situations.  When the Vault is unreachable, MAAS will inform the users that interactions with Vault will fail.

MAAS will make every attempt to present a meaningful error if Vault is not functional.  This includes related authentication errors when attempting to login to MAAS.

<a href="#heading--How-to-unseal-Vault"><h2 id="heading--How-to-unseal-Vault">How to unseal Vault</h2></a>

In certain situations, outside of MAAS control, the Vault might be sealed. In this case, we will display this notification because MAAS cannot access Vault. The user will be logged out of the UI because MAAS cannot access Vault. The user needs to unseal the Vault to restore access to MAAS:

![|974x255](https://lh4.googleusercontent.com/Sf49gilbeLRTYIch19bZvsYMgWXDbqMFJjKIVRocblIddQ0k5PsprW_M5MJkpCy9YfydNAuS_qzevcPputSJJ8odOxnACOq5wuLQHFPoS8Ak0UK4San-q6qw1v0bkluPXxnS8oELl4yaphI95enJR4iWs9X0g6nkeWcqPM7VILs55YngTfm2VG68GxRSpw)

<a href="#heading--Updating-secrets-directly"><h2 id="heading--Updating-secrets-directly">Updating secrets directly</h2></a>

Secrets related to MAAS stored in Vault could be changed outside of MAAS, directly in Vault. If this happens, MAAS automatically uses the new value, as MAAS elements do not cache secrets -- they are fetched every time they're needed.

MAAS deals with a number of secrets (user password, certificates and keys, API tokens, …). Those are currently stored in the database, which is not secure by default.

Commit message:

[how-to-use-vault-to-protect-your-maas-secrets.html] updated text to lean more heavily toward Hashicorp documentation

src/how-to-use-vault-to-protect-your-maas-secrets-6534.md, after:

<!-- "How to use Vault to protect your MAAS secrets" -->

As a MAAS administrator, you do not want secrets associated with a MAAS instance to be stored in the database, since it often doesn’t comply with security regulations.  Examples of the MAAS settings which contain secrets are the OMAPI key and the RPC secret. Beginning with version 3.3, MAAS secrets should instead be stored in [HashiCorp Vault](https://www.hashicorp.com/products/vault).

Examples of such secrets are

- Database connection credentials
- Shared RPC key
- OMAPI key
- BMC power credentials (password, keys and certificates) for machines
- VMhost credentials
- Macaroon keys


<a href="#heading--Configuring-Vault-for-MAAS"><h2 id="heading--Configuring-Vault-for-MAAS">Configuring Vault for MAAS</h2></a>

For MAAS to be able to integrate with Vault, a few steps are required.  Specifically, you must get a role_id and wrapped_token via Vault CLI (follow the instructions from [Hashicorp Vault](https://learn.hashicorp.com/tutorials/vault/approle-best-practices?in=vault/auth-methods#approle-response-wrapping)).

As an example only, MAAS can be configured by a Vault admin using the `vault` CLI.

1) The `approle` engine must be enabled. This can be checked with:

```nohighlight
$ vault auth list
```

You should verify that it's mounted under `approle/`.  If not, it can be enabled via:

```nohighlight
$ vault auth enable approle
```

2) The KV v2 engine is mounted under the desired path (`secret/` by default, but can be configured as desired). A new KV engine can be mounted with:

```nohighlight
$ vault secrets enable -path $SECRETS_MOUNT kv-v2
```

3) An appropriate policy that can be assigned to approles configured in MAAS should be configured, providing read/write access to the secrets paths that MAAS will use.  As an example, here is a minimal policy:

```nohighlight
path "$SECRETS_MOUNT/metadata/$SECRETS_PATH/" {
	capabilities = ["list"]
}

path "$SECRETS_MOUNT/metadata/$SECRETS_PATH/*" {
	capabilities = ["read", "update", "delete", "list"]
}

path "$SECRETS_MOUNT/data/${SECRETS_PATH}/*" {
	capabilities = ["read", "create", "update", "delete"]
}
```
Here, `$SECRETS_PATH` is the desired path prefix under which MAAS will store secrets. This, together with `$SECRETS_MOUNT`, will be used when configuring MAAS later. Such a policy can be created in Vault as follows (assuming it was written to `$POLICY_FILE`):

```nohighlight
$ vault policy write $MAAS_POLICY $POLICY_FILE
```

4) For each MAAS region controller, create a role using the policy created above:

```nohighlight
$ vault write auth/approle/role/$ROLE_NAME \
policies=$MAAS_POLICY token_ttl=5m
```

Tthe TTL for tokens can be tweaked as desired.

While it's technically possible to use the same approle for all controllers, it's suggested to use different ones for each.  This increases security and reduces exposure in case credentials are leaked from one controller.

Fetch the role ID for the created role with the following command:

```nohighlight
$ vault read auth/approle/role/$ROLE_NAME/role-id
```

5) For each created role, create a secret ID, returned with a wrapping token. This, together with the role ID, will be provided to the MAAS controller:

```nohighlight
$ vault write -wrap-ttl=5m auth/approle/role/$ROLE_NAME/secret-id
```

<a href="#heading--Integrating-Vault-with-MAAS"><h2 id="heading--Integrating-Vault-with-MAAS">Integrating Vault with MAAS</h2></a>

Once MAAS is installed and configured, it's possible to integrate it with Vault with a few steps, using the CLI:

```nohighlight
sudo maas config-vault configure $URL $APPROLE_ID $WRAPPED_TOKEN $SECRETS_PATH --secrets-mount $SECRET_MOUNT
```
where the `$APPROLE_ID` and `$WRAPPED_TOKEN` are the ones obtained by Vault in the previous steps.

[note]
This operation must be performed on each region controller before the integration process can continue.
[/note]

Once this operation has been performed on all region controllers, it's possible to migrate secrets to Vault and complete the integration process, with the following command:

```nohighlight
$ sudo maas config-vault migrate
```
During migration, MAAS might be offline for a few seconds, but it will refresh quickly.  After this command, MAAS will be fully integrated and functional with Vault. You can confirm success in the UI by checking **Settings --> Configuration --> Security**:

![|649x586](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/6huwJZKrnraNHM3hiiVGcrTgOSHD_b0KJOLL1N4s05rKnhQ09UYgMdQHuo5MT_N3lqKn02C_Qg7RQmfrELC4Xjj1pOjIo-N4mMBB8oRj1mfPLbyuw5oKO6jNvvAtUQxwrnKww5DDT1IYDfh9jFCwIoy6MLnOR831kzYHVsgDASfUNEMAW-dwJNdSAt_xTA)

[note] 
If you try to migrate secrets before all region controllers are configured with Vault, the migrate command will fail with an error message.
[/note]

If you've configured all region controllers with Vault, but haven't yet migrated the secrets, the integration process will simply remain incomplete.  The UI will remind you:

![|670x338](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/v2_glOaBx8hTy7TmhD3Y5qe34iFePJN5Z46ZeY6UvGXF7eD4m7chplXtbKIKZMchs2D5WAJSit0tlH27onPV1oUnLZVKwyVOncje3QaZ0n4d-1sjTV5sfuQFopuql_COE0FfvDSFTcKeElnThC3_gKIg6YlNQ-JKvLH6t9sgp6UwrTPAnHzoGpQ6eSmeBQ)

<a href="#heading--When-the-Vault-is-sealed"><h2 id="heading--When-the-Vault-is-sealed">When the Vault is sealed</h2></a>

There are two conditions that may cause secrets to become unavailable: when the Vault is sealed (using `vault operator seal` -- see the [Vault documentation](https://www.hashicorp.com/products/vault) and when the Vault is unreachable through misconfiguration or other failure.

When the Vault is sealed, all queries involving secrets will fail with a user error mentioning that the Vault has been sealed.  Unsealing the Vault requires operator intervention, via the `vault operator unseal` command (again, see the [Vault documentation](https://www.hashicorp.com/products/vault).  MAAS will indicate when this is needed.

Vault may become unreachable due to a network failure, due to incorrect configuration of a region controller, or other unintentional situations.  When the Vault is unreachable, MAAS will inform the users that interactions with Vault will fail.

MAAS will make every attempt to present a meaningful error if Vault is not functional.  This includes related authentication errors when attempting to login to MAAS.

<a href="#heading--Updating-secrets-directly"><h2 id="heading--Updating-secrets-directly">Updating secrets directly</h2></a>

Secrets related to MAAS stored in Vault could be changed outside of MAAS, directly in Vault. If this happens, MAAS automatically uses the new value, as MAAS elements do not cache secrets -- they are fetched every time they're needed.

MAAS deals with a number of secrets (user password, certificates and keys, API tokens, …). Those are currently stored in the database, which is not secure by default.
